Prepare 3.2 version of specification (#133)
fsfe/reuse-docs: spec.md

# SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2019 Free Software Foundation Europe e.V.
# SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

title: "REUSE Specification – Version 3.2"
---

This specification defines a standardised method for declaring copyright and
licensing for software projects. The goal of the specification is to have
comprehensive, unambiguous, human- and machine-readable copyright and licensing

> information for each individual file in a project. Ideally this information is

Author: Adding a comment at the first instance of 'copyright and licensing information' in this file.

I rather hate that mouthful, and it's awkward to write in text, especially when the word 'and' makes the sentence ambiguous.

I was recently made aware of the term 'Copyright Management Information (CMI)' used in US law, notably the DMCA. According to [Copyright Alliance](https://copyrightalliance.org/education/copyright-law-explained/the-digital-millennium-copyright-act-dmca/copyright-management-information/), CMI 'would include the copyrighted work’s title, ISBN number or copyright registration number; **the copyright owner’s name**; the creator’s name. name; **and terms and conditions** for use of the work.'

I don't know if it makes sense to change the term 'Copyright and Licensing Information' with 'Copyright Management Information (CMI)' because we only intend to mean a subset of CMI, but I would love love love love to change the wording.

Reviewer: I get that and I agree that a single expression word would help phrasing documentation. Some suggestions that came to my mind:

- **Annotations**: more focused on how it is used, but can be a word that is used consistently in the REUSE documentation.
- **License information**: when speaking I often focus on the license information, taking the necessary copyright information as implied/included. Given that copyright and license headers are separate I can see how this can lead to confusion.
- **Legal information**: a broader term that might include more information and is less precise than the explicit mention of copyright and license information.

Author: I am lukewarm to 'annotations', but do not like that it is plural, and do not like that it doesn't contain the word 'licensing' or 'copyright' or some such.

I do not like 'license information' because sometimes, occasionally, you want to talk about license information to the _exclusion_ of copyright information.

'Legal information' seems too broad to me indeed.

I am raising this here, but I would like to use the term we decide on _outside_ of the spec as well.

Internally in the tool, I call this information '**REUSE Information**', but 'REUSE Information' has a little more metadata than just 'copyright and licensing' that may or may not be relevant, specifically _other SPDX tags_ (currently only `SPDX-FileContributorText`).

Reviewer 2: What about just “licensing information”?

That should imply copyright info a bit stronger, since “license information” could be read as limited to just the license.

These are the definitions for some of the terms used in this specification:

- REUSE Tool --- helper tool for compliance with this specification; available
  at <https://github.com/fsfe/reuse-tool>.
- Project --- any unit of content that can be associated with a distribution of
  software. Typically, a Project is composed of one or more files. Also
  sometimes called a package.
- License File --- a file containing the text of a license.
- Copyright and Licensing Information --- the information that lists the
  copyright holders of a file or work, and describes under which licenses the
  file or work is made available.
- Copyright Notice --- a line of text that conveys copyright of a copyright
  holder. Its format is defined in the [Format of Copyright
  Notices](#format-of-copyright-notices) section.
- Covered File --- any file in a Project, except for
    - The License Files.

>     - `COPYING` and `LICENSE`, with or without file extensions.

Reviewer 3: If we're already specific here, what about mentioning `LICENSES/` here or in the line above?

Author: agree

  copyright holders of a file or work, and describes under which licenses the
  file or work is made available.

- Copyright Notice --- a line of text that conveys copyright of a copyright

>   holder.

Author: done

      Specification, Clause
      4.4](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/conformance/#44-standard-data-format-requirements)
      (example: `sbom.spdx.json`).
    - `COPYING` and `LICENSE`, with or without file extensions. These files
      typically contain license texts. They are ignored by the REUSE

>       specification for compatibility reasons.

Reviewer: This is already the first item on the list, albeit more explicit. These items should be merged rather then duplicated.

Author: Soft agree, but `COPYING` and `LICENSE` are not Capital L Capital F License Files. License Files here are specifically defined as the files with license texts in the `LICENSES/` directory, which `COPYING` and `LICENSE` are not. In fact, these files needn't even contain license texts—they can be a summary of licensing.

I have moved these two items closer together, and included a more thorough description of `COPYING` and `LICENSE` in the text body.

Everything that applies to licenses in this section also applies to license
exceptions, with the exception that it is NOT possible to have a license
exception that does not exist in the SPDX License List.

For avoidance of doubt, in practice this means that for every license and
exception that is part of any SPDX License Expression in any Copyright and
Licensing Information associated with any Covered File, there MUST exist a
License File as defined in this section.

You MAY include a `COPYING` or `LICENSE` file (with or without file extensions)
in your project for compliance with other standards, conventions, or tools.
These files MAY contain a copy of the license text, a summary of your licensing,
or anything else. These files are ignored by the REUSE Tool.

## Copyright and Licensing Information

Each Covered File MUST have Copyright and Licensing Information associated with
it. You can associate Copyright and Licensing Information with a file in the
following ways:

- Comment headers
- REUSE.toml
- DEP5 (deprecated)

REUSE.toml and DEP5 are mutually exclusive. You MUST NOT use both
simultaneously.

Additionally, you can associate Copyright and Licensing Information with

> Snippets inside of files.

Reviewer 3: Can we refer to the separate section, or mention it somehow (like "see below" or so)?

Author: sure, agree

Author: I am deciding against this because everything in this section is documented in its subsections. This text is just a small preamble, and the relevant section here is almost immediately below the referenced text.

exceptions, with the exception that it is NOT possible to have a license
exception that does not exist in the SPDX License List.

For avoidance of doubt, in practice this means that for every license and
exception that is part of any SPDX License Expression in any Copyright and
Licensing Information associated with any Covered File, there MUST exist a
License File as defined in this section.

## Copyright and Licensing Information

Each Covered File MUST have Copyright and Licensing Information associated with
it. You can associate Copyright and Licensing Information with a file in the
following ways:

- Comment headers
- REUSE.toml
- DEP5 (deprecated)

REUSE.toml and DEP5 are mutually exclusive. You MUST NOT use both
simultaneously.

Additionally, you can associate Copyright and Licensing Information with
Snippets inside of files.

### Comment headers

To implement this method, a Commentable File MUST declare the file's Copyright
and Licensing Information in a comment header. The Information SHOULD be as
close to the top of the top of the file as possible in a comment header. The

> Commentable File SHOULD use UTF-8 encoding.

Reviewer: Good improvement!

For Uncommentable Files, the comment header that declares the file's Copyright
and Licensing Information MUST be in an adjacent text file of the same name with
the additional extension `.license` (example: `cat.jpg.license` if the original
file is `cat.jpg`). The adjacent file SHOULD use UTF-8 encoding.

`.license` files MAY be used with Commentable Files, but it is still RECOMMENDED
that comment headers be put inside Commentable Files.

The comment header MUST contain one or more Copyright Notices and one or more
`SPDX-License-Identifier` tag-value pairs. A tag is followed by a colon,
followed by a text value, and terminated by a newline.

The `SPDX-License-Identifier` tag MUST be followed by a valid SPDX License
Expression describing the licensing of the file (example:
`SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later OR Apache-2.0`).

An example of a comment header:

```
# SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2016, 2018-2019 Jane Doe <jane@example.com>

> # SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2019 Example NGO

Reviewer: Sure, a minor change to promote the holding of copyright not by companies but by other entities. Perhaps a simple word 'organisation' is sufficient?
```suggestion
# SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2019 Example Organisation
```

Author: ok!

#
# SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
```

#### In-line Snippet comments

> If some Copyright and Licensing Information inside of a Commentable File is to
> apply only to a certain Snippet instead of the whole file, SPDX snippet tags
> MUST be used for that Snippet (as defined in [SPDX Specification, Annex
> H](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/file-tags/#h3-snippet-tags-format)).
> This means that Copyright Notices inside of Snippets MUST be prefixed with
> `SPDX-SnippetCopyrightText`.

Reviewer: Attempt to use more simple language:
```suggestion
Sometimes Copyright and Licensing Information should only apply to a certain
Snippet instead of the whole Commentable File. For these cases SPDX snippet tags
MUST be used for that Snippet (as defined in [SPDX Specification, Annex
H](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/file-tags/#h3-snippet-tags-format)).
This means that Copyright Notices inside of Snippets MUST be prefixed with
`SPDX-SnippetCopyrightText`.
```

Author: Ack, slightly modified ('should only apply' → 'only applies')

file's Copyright and Licensing Information.

For Uncommentable Files, the comment header that declares the file's Copyright

> and Licensing Information MUST be in an adjacent UTF-8 encoded text file of the same 

Author: Kept the MUST, moved the UTF-8 thing into a separate sentence with SHOULD.

```
# SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2016, 2018-2019 Jane Doe <jane@example.com>
# SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2019 Example NGO
#
# SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
```

> 

Author: Done, moved to own h3 section.

Specification, Annex H](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/file-tags/#h3-snippet-tags-format)).
If some Copyright and Licensing Information inside of a Commentable File is to
apply only to a certain Snippet instead of the whole file, SPDX snippet tags
MUST be used for that Snippet (as defined in [SPDX Specification, Annex
H](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/file-tags/#h3-snippet-tags-format)).
This means that Copyright Notices inside of Snippets MUST be prefixed with
`SPDX-SnippetCopyrightText`.

Such an annotated snippet block MUST start with `SPDX-SnippetBegin` to mark its
beginning and end with `SPDX-SnippetEnd` to mark the snippet's end.
Like with comment headers, the SPDX snippet tags SHOULD be commented.

Do note that SPDX snippet tags MUST start with `SPDX-Snippet`, meaning that the
correct copyright notice in a snippet is `SPDX-SnippetCopyrightText`.
A Snippet SHOULD contain both a Copyright Notice and an SPDX License Expression.

Example:

```
# SPDX-SnippetBegin
# SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
# SPDX-SnippetCopyrightText: 2022 Jane Doe <jane@example.com>
# SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

{$snippet_code_goes_here}
print("Hello, world!")

# SPDX-SnippetEnd
```

> Snippets may nest, and this is denoted by having

Author: Agreed. In fact, the deleted text was taken from the SPDX spec. It's not necessary to repeat here.

# SPDX-SnippetEnd
```

### REUSE.toml

Copyright and Licensing Information MAY be associated with a file through a
REUSE.toml file. The intended use case of this method is large directories where
including a comment header in each file (or in `.license` companion files) is
impossible or undesirable.

A REUSE.toml file MAY be located in any directory, and can cover files that are
within its directory or deeper. You MAY have multiple REUSE.toml files in
different directories.

The `version` key (REQUIRED) MUST have an integer value representing the schema
version of the file. This specification describes version 1 of REUSE.toml.

Each `[[annotations]]` table represents an association of Copyright and
Licensing Information to zero or more Covered Files. It has the following keys:

> - `path` (REQUIRED), a string or list of strings of paths relative to the

Author: following up in https://github.com/fsfe/reuse-docs/pull/133#discussion_r1509132657

>   REUSE.toml file's directory. Each path is a path to a Covered File with which

Author: I've re-written it as follows, which also solved the 'string or list of strings of path' sounding complicated:

```md
- `path` (REQUIRED), a string or list of strings representing paths. A path
  SHOULD resolve to one or more Covered Files relative to the `REUSE.toml`
  file's directory. A path MAY use globbing to match several Covered Files in a
  single expression. These are the globbing and matching rules:
```

  to associate the table's Copyright and Licensing Information. A path MAY fail
  to resolve to a file in the Project. A path MAY use globbing. These are the

>   globbing and matching rules:

Author: Yes, kind of:

https://facelessuser.github.io/wcmatch/glob/#syntax

They're from the documentation of the library I use, which is the only(?) Python library that I could find that does most of what I want it to do.

However, pointing to a library documentation seems a little silly to me. This is worsened by the fact that the library is heavily configurable, and we use 3 optional flags to get the behaviour we want.

This hypothetical line just seems out of place in the spec:

> Globbing behaves like the wcmatch library with the DOTGLOB, FORCEUNIX, and GLOBSTAR flags. (insert link to documentation)

  - `*` matches everything except slashes, including `.` prefixes.

  - `**` matches everything including slashes.

>   - `?` matches any single character.

Author: except slash

  - `[seq]` matches any character in the sequence.

>   - `[!seq]` matches any character not in the sequence.

Author: better documentation for this

Author: we could rip this functionality out by pre-parsing and escaping square brackets

Reviewer: I don't understand your last comment. Better documentation with examples could help.

Author: So the problem is that we use the wcglob library in the tool. And the wcglob library has a minimal set of functionality which _includes_ `[seq]` and `[!seq]`. See [wcglob's Syntax](https://facelessuser.github.io/wcmatch/glob/#syntax). For examples of seq, see [here](https://facelessuser.github.io/wcmatch/glob/#posix-character-classes).

What I _don't_ want to do is, in this specification, say 'yeah the globbing rules are just wcglob's behaviour'.

And although I like 99% of the behaviour of wcglob as I have tuned it for the tool, the inclusion of `[seq]` and `[!seq]` is completely unneeded. We _don't need that stuff_, and there's no way to turn it off. But, as you can see from the richness of the examples, documenting that behaviour is hell, and they don't really do that themselves either. They just hold to _longum iter est per praecepta, breve et efficax per exempla_.

There are a few things we can subsequently do:

1. Open an issue against wcglob and plead them to include an option to turn this behaviour off. Or do this ourselves—I can write Python!
2. Do a bad job of documenting this. See: the referenced code.
3. Don't document it at all. This isn't great.
4. Do a good job of documenting this. But: that's a loooot of words spent on a feature _we don't even want_.
5. Make an attempt at turning this behaviour off downstream. Whenever we see `[` or `]`, escape that character internally in the REUSE tool, and the seq behaviour will never be triggered. Subsequently, we needn't document this. But: this may have unintended consequences, maybe. I'm not sure.

Author: Created an issue and a PR against wcmatch:

- https://github.com/facelessuser/wcmatch/issues/212
- https://github.com/facelessuser/wcmatch/pull/213

Author: Upstream doesn't really want the contribution. I had another look at the code, and I was able do a simple alternative implementation that gets rid of the things we do not want. I will patch this up.

Author: The resulting spec is:

```markdown
  - `*` matches everything except forward slashes (i.e. path separators).
  - `**` and `**/` match everything including forward slashes (i.e. path
    separators).
  - In order to escape an asterisk and include it verbatim, prefix it with `\\`.
    You cannot prefix it with `\` because that is invalid TOML. In order to
    include a backslash verbatim, use `\\\\`. `\\` followed by any other
    character is functionally equal to just typing that character.
```

Not _perfect_, especially because TOML means no clean escaping.

This could be simplified if we got rid of escaping. Then asterisks _always_ match.

We could also conditionally insert a backslash on `\\` instead of on `\\\\` if not followed by an asterisk, but that sounds like a bad idea.

  - `\` is an escape character.

  - If the path does not contain directory separators (`/`), then any file in
    the REUSE.toml file's directory or subdirectories that matches the glob or

>     file name is matched.

Author: I was unable to get `./file.py` to work. I've ripped this functionality out. It violates the principle of least astonishment a little too much.

>     file name is matched.

Reviewer 2: So what’s the solution now in practice?

>     file name is matched.

Author: There is no solution. Or rather, if you want to cover `./file.py`, you just type `file.py`, and `this/file/here/file.py` will not be affected.

- `precedence` (OPTIONAL), a literal string. It determines the order of
  precedence for Copyright and Licensing Information between the REUSE.toml file
  and Covered Files in the table, and between multiple REUSE.toml files if they
  both contain Information for the same Covered File. Available values are:

  - `closest`, the default value when `precedence` is not defined. This is an
    instruction to use the Copyright and Licensing Information inside of the
    Covered Files or their `.license` files, if available. If no such

>     Information is found, then the Information inside the closest REUSE.toml

Author: This is already covered earlier.

> A `REUSE.toml` file MAY be located in any directory, and can cover files that are
> within its directory or deeper. You MAY have multiple `REUSE.toml` files in
> different directories.

    that covers the File is associated. This is effectively a fallback.

  - `aggregate`. This is an instruction to always associate the Copyright and
    Licensing Information defined in the table with the table's Covered Files.

>     Subsequently, the `closest` logic is also applied.

Author: a touch vague

Reviewer 2: How about:

> `aggregate`. This is an instruction to aggregate the Copyright and Licensing Information for each Covered File from all the `REUSE.toml` files and the `.license` file that cover it. […]

Author: That's not what it does.

It associates the current REUSE.toml's information for the file with the file. Subsequently, it runs the `closest` algorithm as written above. It's a bit tricky, but it works.

  - `toml`. This is an instruction to associate the Copyright and Licensing
    Information defined in the table with the table's Covered Files, and to
    ignore any other Information that is closer to the Files. The REUSE.toml
    that is the closest to the root of the Project is authoritative.

- `SPDX-FileCopyrightText` (REQUIRED), a string or list of strings. Each string
  MUST be a Copyright Notice to be associated with the table's Covered Files.

>   The prefix of the Copyright Notice MAY be omitted.

Reviewer 2: `SPDX-FileCopyrightText` counts as a “prefix” as defined below, so this either allows for the SPDX tag to be part of the string (causing a duplicate tag), or that definition needs to differentiate between the SPDX tag and (other) prefixes.

See my comment on making `SPDX-FileCopyrightText` required ;)

Author: I'm not sure what you mean. The goal here is to support the following:

```toml
[[annotations]]
path = "no_prefix.py"
SPDX-FileCopyrightText = "2019 Jane Doe"

[[annotations]]
path = "with_prefix.py"
SPDX-FileCopyrightText = "SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2019 Jane Doe",
```

The prefixed notices are technically more _correct_, in a sense, but people are going to write without prefixes anyway, because obviously the prefix is already there in the TOML key. We could attempt to force people to add a prefix, but it's hard to succinctly explain, and those kinds of snags don't help adoption.

For additional context:

What's in the TOML key doesn't end up in the REUSE internals, and subsequently not in the SPDX output.

This will all be heaps easier when I get around to https://github.com/fsfe/reuse-tool/issues/947. We could retroactively add the prefix in the REUSE internals.

- `SPDX-License-Identifier` (REQUIRED), a string or list of strings. Each string
  MUST be a valid SPDX License Expression describing the licensing of the
  table's Covered Files.

If a Covered File is covered by multiple `[[annotations]]` tables in the same
REUSE.toml file, then exclusively the last table in the file is used for that
Covered File.

An example of a REUSE.toml file:

```toml
version = 1

[[annotations]]
path = ["po/*.po", "po/*.pot"]
precedence = "aggregate"
SPDX-FileCopyrightText = "2019 Translation Company"
SPDX-License-Identifier = "GPL-3.0-or-later"
```

### DEP5 (Deprecated)

Copyright and Licensing Information MAY be associated with a file through a DEP5

> file, but you SHOULD create a REUSE.toml file instead.

Author: done

# REUSE-IgnoreEnd
```

### REUSE.toml

Copyright and Licensing Information MAY be associated with a file through a
`REUSE.toml` file. The intended use case of this method is large directories where
including a comment header in each file (or in `.license` companion files) is
impossible or undesirable.

A `REUSE.toml` file MAY be located in any directory, and can cover files that are
within its directory or deeper. You MAY have multiple `REUSE.toml` files in

> different directories.

Reviewer 3: Shall we mention that the file is a TOML file, e.g. also with a link to https://toml.io/en?

It's obvious somehow, but if people ask about the syntax, commenting scheme or so...

Author: agree

The `version` key (REQUIRED) MUST have an integer value representing the schema
version of the file. This specification describes version 1 of `REUSE.toml`.

Each `[[annotations]]` table represents an association of Copyright and
Licensing Information to zero or more Covered Files. It has the following keys:

- `path` (REQUIRED), a string or list of strings representing paths. A path MUST
  use forward slashes as path separators. A path SHOULD resolve to one or more
  Covered Files relative to the `REUSE.toml` file's directory. A path MAY use
  globbing to match several Covered Files in a single expression. These are the
  globbing and matching rules:
  - `*` matches everything except forward slashes (i.e. path separators).
  - `**` and `**/` match everything including forward slashes (i.e. path
    separators).
  - In order to escape an asterisk and include it verbatim, prefix it with `\\`.
    You cannot prefix it with `\` because that is invalid TOML. In order to
    include a backslash verbatim, use `\\\\`. `\\` followed by any other

>     character is functionally equal to just typing that character.

Reviewer 3: It may be worth to mention that using `..` for parent directories is not allowed? So only paths in the file's root or child directories are allowed.

Author: This is made explicit in an earlier paragraph:

> A REUSE.toml file MAY be located in any directory, and can cover files that are within its directory or deeper

should it be more explicit?

Reviewer 3: Ah, I somehow missed that. Perhaps adding a sentence behind: "It MUST NOT cover files in parent directories."?

Author: I touched this up in 7bddcad2dc7e9a2cb19c63a2d739da397f50f880. It was tricky to get the language right, but I think it's all right.

- `precedence` (OPTIONAL), a literal string. It determines the order of
  precedence for Copyright and Licensing Information between the `REUSE.toml` file
  and Covered Files in the table, and between multiple `REUSE.toml` files if they
  both contain Information for the same Covered File. Available values are:
  - `closest`, the default value when `precedence` is not defined. This is an
    instruction to associate the Copyright and Licensing Information inside of

>     the Covered Files, if available. If no such Information is found, then the

Reviewer 3: It may be worth to explicitely mention the .license files here. I know, above they are described as an extension to the inside of the covered files, but it may not be as obvious to the common reader.

Author: agree

    Information inside the table of the closest `REUSE.toml` that covers the
    File is associated. This algorithm is applied separately for copyright and
    for licensing. If a table for the same File in a closer `REUSE.toml` file
    has the `override` precedence, then that precedence is applied, and
    `closest` is ignored. This is effectively a fallback.
  - `aggregate`. This is an instruction to always associate the Copyright and
    Licensing Information defined in the table with the table's Covered Files.
    Subsequently, the `closest` logic is also applied.
  - `override`. This is an instruction to associate the Copyright and Licensing
    Information defined in the table with the table's Covered Files, and to
    ignore any other Information that is closer to the Files. The table in the
    `REUSE.toml` that is the closest to the root of the Project is
    authoritative.
- `SPDX-FileCopyrightText` (OPTIONAL), a string or list of strings. Each string
  MUST be a Copyright Notice to be associated with the table's Covered Files.
  The prefix of the Copyright Notice MAY be omitted.

> - `SPDX-License-Identifier` (OPTIONAL), a string or list of strings. Each string

Reviewer 3: Shall we define how to interpret a list of license IDs, so that they effectively mean an `AND`?

Author: This is kind of in SPDX's ballpark. I'd have to re-read what the SPDX spec says on having multiple such tags.

Reviewer 2: I agree this is part of SPDX, and for SPDX 3.x we should discuss with them how this should be treated, as they got rid of tags in SPDX 3.0.

See also https://github.com/fsfe/reuse-docs/issues/143

Author: I think we can get away with not defining this in the REUSE spec.

# REUSE-IgnoreEnd
```

### REUSE.toml

Copyright and Licensing Information MAY be associated with a file through a
`REUSE.toml` file. The intended use case of this method is large directories where
including a comment header in each file (or in `.license` companion files) is

> impossible or undesirable.

Reviewer: Given the intentions of the REUSE project, I would use the opportunity to underline the value of per-file information:
```suggestion
impossible or undesirable. Note that Copyright and Licensing Information per
file is preferred because it is more explicit and more resistant when files
are moved or copied.
```

Author: Agreed, but this is the wrong place. I am writing this in the 'Comment headers' section instead.

A `REUSE.toml` file MAY be located in any directory, and can cover files that are
within its directory or deeper. You MAY have multiple `REUSE.toml` files in
different directories.

The `version` key (REQUIRED) MUST have an integer value representing the schema

> version of the file. This specification describes version 1 of `REUSE.toml`.

Reviewer: Do we anticipate other version numbers, like `1.1` or even alpha releases to try new things?

Author: I think doing semantic versioning here is too granular. I don't expect this version number to bump often or at all. Even if we add new (optional) keys, we don't need to bump this version, I think.

For alpha releases (which we don't really do anyway), we can just pick a number and not really care.

Also, because this is TOML, you can just add your own keys for semantics undefined by the spec. I will add a small paragraph about that.

Reviewer: Agreed, just wanted to be sure.

Each `[[annotations]]` table represents an association of Copyright and
Licensing Information to zero or more Covered Files. It has the following keys:

- `path` (REQUIRED), a string or list of strings representing paths. A path
  SHOULD resolve to one or more Covered Files relative to the `REUSE.toml`
  file's directory. A path MAY use globbing to match several Covered Files in a
  single expression. These are the globbing and matching rules:

>   - `*` matches everything except slashes.

Reviewer: Rather then naming it slashes, we might make explicit that we mean path separators?

Author: Added a clarification note to be more specific. Also explicitly added that FORWARD slash === path separator. We had an issue a while ago where someone tried to use Windows slashes in `.reuse/dep5`.

    `REUSE.toml` that is the closest to the root of the Project is
    authoritative.

- `SPDX-FileCopyrightText` (OPTIONAL), a string or list of strings. Each string
  MUST be a Copyright Notice to be associated with the table's Covered Files.
  The prefix of the Copyright Notice MAY be omitted.

- `SPDX-License-Identifier` (OPTIONAL), a string or list of strings. Each string
  MUST be a valid SPDX License Expression describing the licensing of the
  table's Covered Files.

Although the keys to associate Copyright and Licensing Information with the
Covered File are OPTIONAL, the complete Information MUST still be associated
with the File in some fashion.

If a Covered File is covered by multiple `[[annotations]]` tables in the same
`REUSE.toml` file, then exclusively the last matching table in the file is used
for that Covered File.

An example of a `REUSE.toml` file:

```toml
version = 1

[[annotations]]
path = ["po/*.po", "po/*.pot"]
precedence = "aggregate"
SPDX-FileCopyrightText = "2019 Translation Company"
SPDX-License-Identifier = "GPL-3.0-or-later"
```

### DEP5 (Deprecated)

Copyright and Licensing Information MAY be associated with a file through a DEP5

> file, but you SHOULD create a `REUSE.toml` file instead.

Reviewer: Outside of the title, it should be good to include in the text that this functionality is deprecated.

```suggestion
file, but you SHOULD create a `REUSE.toml` file instead as the DEP5 file is
considered deprecated.
```

Author: Ack, added a comment.

contents are ignored.

Copyright and Licensing Information defined in `.reuse/dep5` is aggregated with
the Copyright and Licensing Information found in the Covered Files or in their
adjacent `.license` files. For clarity, this means that if the SPDX License
Expressions in a file's comment header and in the section for that file in
`.reuse/dep5` do not agree with each other, then both SPDX License Expressions
will apply to the file.

## Format of Copyright Notices

A Copyright Notice MUST start with a tag, word or symbol (collectively:
prefixes) from the following list:

- `SPDX-FileCopyrightText` (or `SPDX-SnippetCopyrightText` in Snippets)
- Copyright
- ©

It is RECOMMENDED to use the `SPDX-FileCopyrightText` tag. You MAY add '(C)',
'(c)' or '©' after the prefix.

A Copyright Notice MUST be terminated by a newline.

The Copyright Notice MUST contain the name of the copyright holder. The
copyright notice SHOULD contain the year of publication and the contact address
of the copyright holder. The order of these items SHOULD be: year, name, contact
address.

The year of publication MAY be a single year, multiple years, or a span of
years.

> The copyright holder SHOULD be an individual, list of individuals, group, legal

Author: I think we should go with `SHOULD`.

## Order of precedence

If a Commentable File contains Copyright and Licensing Information but also has
an adjacent `.license` file, then the Copyright and Licensing Information
defined in the `.license` file takes precedence, and the Commentable File's
contents are ignored.

Copyright and Licensing Information defined in `.reuse/dep5` is aggregated with
the Copyright and Licensing Information found in the covered files or in their
adjacent `.license` files. For clarity, this means that if the SPDX License
Expressions in a file's comment header and in the section for that file in

> `.reuse/dep5` do not agree with each other, then both SPDX License Expressions

Reviewer 2: I find this a bit weird, TBH. Example:

- source code file says: `MIT`
- its `.license` file says: `CC0`
- `.reuse/dep5` (in the future `reuse.yaml`, I suppose) says: `* GPL-2.0-only`

Ergo `reuse` says: `CC0 AND GPL-2.0-only`

But in my example dep5 used a very broad-scoped glob, so I would not really trust it. And especially not over what the source code header itself says.

I know we had a very very long thread about this and I’m not trying to re-start the discussion. It is just that I don’t remember the outcome of that thread being such.

Author: You're correct. That thread is [here](https://github.com/fsfe/reuse-tool/issues/779). Especially note the use case in my first post.

The situation is Not Good. But I think it's valuable to do a relatively minor 3.2 release of the spec that finally defines the (formally) unspecified behaviour of the tool.

Then later we can do a 4.0 release that completely fixes the order of precedence.

Do you think this section should include a notice à la 'by the way, this is going to change in the future'? I considered it, but decided against it with no good rationale.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it makes sense to include it here then, if it’s going to change / break anyway in 4.0.

Author: Because we're keeping DEP5 compatibility in the meantime, I'm keeping this as-is.

prefixes) from the following list:

- `SPDX-FileCopyrightText` (or `SPDX-SnippetCopyrightText` in Snippets)
- Copyright
- ©

It is RECOMMENDED to use the `SPDX-FileCopyrightText` tag. You MAY add '(C)' or
'©' after the prefix.

A Copyright Notice MUST be terminated by a newline.

The Copyright Notice MUST contain the name of the copyright holder. The
copyright notice SHOULD contain the year of publication and the contact address
of the copyright holder. The order of these items SHOULD be: year, name, contact
address.

The year of publication MAY be a single year, multiple years, or a span of
years.

The copyright holder SHOULD be an individual, list of individuals, group, legal
entity, or any other descriptor by which one can easily identify the copyright
holder(s).

Any contact address SHOULD be in between angle brackets.

You MAY add any further information to the Copyright Notice.

Examples of valid Copyright Notices:

```
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2019 Jane Doe <jane@example.com>
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: © 2019 John Doe <joe@example.com>
SPDX-SnippetCopyrightText: (C) Example Cooperative <info@coop.example.com>
© Example Corporation <https://corp.example.com>

> Copyright 2016, 2018-2019 Joe Anybody

Reviewer 2: Can we finally get rid of the Copyright Notices that are without `SPDX-*CopyrightText`?

Author: Let's discuss this at the 26 October coordinator meeting.

I propose we delay that for the 4.0 spec, because it's a breaking change.

Reviewer 4: Requiring that prefix makes adopting this standard harder for older projects, so if it happens, please don't do it at a point release.

Reviewer 2: Absolutely agree that this should be a major release change.

> Copyright (c) Alice, some rights reserved

Reviewer 2: Another common example is 
```suggestion
Copyright (c) Alice, some rights reserved
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Alice Hack and (other) contributors to Project X <https://git.example.org/alicehack/projectx/CONTRIBUTORS.md>
```

I see that especially when it comes to either personal projects that grew quite a bit, or corporate projects where it says “CompanyX and contributors to ProjectY”

## Order of precedence

If a Commentable File contains Copyright and Licensing Information but also has
an adjacent `.license` file, then the Copyright and Licensing Information
defined in the `.license` file takes precedence, and the Commentable File's
contents are ignored.

Copyright and Licensing Information defined in `.reuse/dep5` is aggregated with

> the Copyright and Licensing Information found in the covered files or in their

Author: Covered Files is a defined term, I think. Should be capitalised.

There is no merging of information from different sources. Only the
source with the highest precedence is considered.

## Format of Copyright Notices

A Copyright Notice MUST start with a tag, word or symbol (collectively:
prefixes) from the following list:

- `SPDX-FileCopyrightText` (or `SPDX-SnippetCopyrightText` in Snippets)
- Copyright
- ©

It is RECOMMENDED to use the `SPDX-FileCopyrightText` tag. You MAY add '(C)' or

> '©' after the prefix.

Author: missing '(c)' (lowercase)

Author: @silverhook Do you have a good half-sentence rationale that we could add at the end of the quoted sentence? Something like 'You MAY choose to add [...] after the prefix in order to $very_short_rationale_here'.

Reviewer 2: How about:

> You MAY choose to add [...] after the prefix _to have the best of both worlds – have the copyright notice easy to find using the SPDX tag as well as following the form established by the Berne convention_.

Author: I'm going to close that as being too long and opinionated.
